.\"-
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Tobias Kortkamp <tobik@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 19, 2019
.Dt PORTCLIPPY 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm portclippy
.Nd "lint FreeBSD Ports Collection Makefiles"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar Makefile
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a tool for linting
.Fx
Ports Collection Makefiles.
.Pp
At the moment it only checks variable order and is a companion tool
for
.Xr portlint 1 .
.Pp
If the optional
.Ar Makefile
argument is not given, the Makefile will be read from stdin.
.Pp
.Nm
will output a skeleton view of the port.
It can be used to check if a variable is in the right position.
It is heavily inspired by Chapter 15 of the Porter's Handbook and
provides an objective measure for it.
.Pp
Variables in wrong positions will be marked with -.
The position they should appear in is marked with a +.
.Pp
Variables that start with an underscore _ will be ignored.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev CLICOLOR_FORCE"
.It Ev CLICOLOR_FORCE
If defined will force enable colored output even when stdout is not
a tty.
.Ev NO_COLOR
takes precendence.
.It Ev NO_COLOR
If defined will force disable colored output.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
will exit with 0 if it could not find a problem, and >0 if there are
issues.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
$ portclippy Makefile
# BLOCK_PORTNAME
PORTNAME
DISTVERSION
CATEGORIES
MASTER_SITES

# BLOCK_MAINTAINER
MAINTAINER
COMMENT

# BLOCK_LICENSE
LICENSE
LICENSE_FILE

# BLOCK_DEPENDS
+RUN_DEPENDS

# BLOCK_USES
+USES

-RUN_DEPENDS
.Ed
.Pp
The output of
.Nm
is inspired by unified
.Xr diff 1
output.
Here RUN_DEPENDS is in the wrong position (marked with -) and
should be moved to before USES (marked with +).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr portfmt 1 ,
.Xr portlint 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Tobias Kortkamp Aq Mt tobik@FreeBSD.org
